Executive Summary
An in-depth analysis of the comprehensive costs associated with electric vehicle
(EV) ownership is crucial for a holistic understanding of the economic landscape
surrounding the attempted mass transition from internal combustion engine
vehicles (ICEVs) to EVs. Major selling points promoted by EV advocates are
lower maintenance and fueling costs over the life of the vehicle and the common
claim that reductions in battery prices will eventually make EVs less expensive
to own than ICEVs. For example, a study conducted by a group at the Argonne
National Laboratory estimated that while an average EV is about $22,000 more
expensive to purchase than a comparable ICEV, they cost about $14,000 less to
fuel, insure and maintain over a 15-year period, making their lifetime cost only
$8,047 more than an ICEV (Burnham et al., 2021, p. 144, Table B.1).
Setting aside some of the questionable assumptions used in deriving such
favorable economics for EVs, no one has attempted to calculate the full financial
benefit of the wide array of direct subsidies, regulatory credits, and subsidized
infrastructure that contribute to the economic viability of EVs. In this paper, we
show that the average model year (MY) 2021 EV would cost $48,698 more to
own over a 10-year period without $22 billion in government favors given to EV
manufacturers and owners.
EV advocates claim that the cost of electricity for EV owners is equal to $1.21
per gallon of gasoline (Edison Electric Institute, 2021), but the cost of charging
equipment and charging losses, averaged out over 10 years and 120,000 miles, is
$1.38 per gallon equivalent on top of that. Adding the costs of the subsidies to
the true cost of fueling an EV would equate to an EV owner paying $17.33 per
gallon of gasoline. And these estimates do not include the hundreds of billions
more in subsidies in the Inflation Reduction Act (2022) for various aspects of the
EV supply chain, particularly for battery manufacturing. It is not an overstate-
ment to say that the federal government is subsidizing EVs to a greater degree
than even wind and solar electricity generation and embarking on an unprece-
dented endeavor to remake the entire American auto industry.
Despite massive incentives, EVs are receiving a tepid response from the major-
ity of Americans who cannot shoulder their higher cost. Car lots are swelling
with unsold EVs (Muller, 2023), and the Ford Motor Company is losing over
$70,000 on each EV it currently sells (Bryce, 2023). EV enthusiasts are holding out for breakthroughs in battery tech-
nology—batteries being the main factor in the high cost of EVs—to reduce prices and make EVs more widespread. But
advances in battery technology are measured not in months but in decades, and the downward trend of lithium-ion
battery costs over the past decade has largely ended (IEA, 2023a). It’s time for federal and state governments to stop driving the American auto industry off an economic cliff
and allow markets to drive further improvements in cost
and efficiency.
Introduction
A common argument in favor of electric vehicles (EVs)
is that, despite their higher upfront costs, their lifetime
ownership costs are comparable to or even lower than
gas-powered vehicles, also known as internal combustion
engine vehicles (ICEVs). These lower lifetime costs are
calculated based on lower maintenance costs resulting
from the simplicity of electric motors compared to gasoline
engines and the lower cost of charging an EV compared to
the cost of gasoline over the lifetime of an ICEV (Harto,
2020; Borlaug et al., 2020).
A group from Argonne National Laboratory attempted
to analyze this argument with a detailed 2021 study and
projected that a model year 2025 (MY2025) EV with a
300-mile range will cost $96,295 to purchase, insure, fuel,
and maintain over 15 years if driven 12,000 miles per year
(Burnham et al., 2021, p. 144, Table B.1). A typical light-
duty ICEV—the paper uses a small SUV as its base case—
costs about $22,000 less to purchase ($28,935 vs. $50,703)
but is only $8,047 less expensive over its lifetime ($88,248
vs. $96,295) because ICEV has higher fueling and mainte-
nance costs.
However, even this simplified analysis ignores the hid-
den and embedded costs that EV owners are not paying
directly. When we pay for a gallon of gasoline, we are
paying for the entire infrastructure to refine, transport,
and market that gasoline. When an EV owner connects to
the electric grid, how much are they paying for the extra
generation, transmission, and distribution costs that they
are imposing on the grid, and will those embedded costs
rise over time? And then there are the federal and state
taxes imposed on every gallon of gasoline compared with
tax rebates for EVs, as well as the indirect subsidies created
by the federal Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE)
standards and the Environmental Protection Agency’s
(EPA) greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions standards, which
this paper will show are surprisingly large and are being
absorbed by buyers of ICEVs.
When we add up these hidden costs, especially if the share
of EVs grows from their current 8% market share of new
vehicles being sold in the U.S. (IEA, 2023b, “EV sales share,
cars, USA, 2010-2022” section), we find that the lifetime
cost of a typical EV is far greater than that of an ICEV. Even
a significant drop in battery costs is unlikely to close the gap in the near future. Figure 1 below shows the lifetime
embedded costs as well as the direct and indirect subsidy
costs of an EV compared to a new ICEV.
The elements of this chart can be broken down into three
buckets. First are the direct subsidies paid out by the fed-
eral government and many state governments. Most promi-
nent among the litany of direct subsidies is the $7,500
federal tax credit for EVs which was recently extended and
modified by the Inflation Reduction Act (H.R. 5376, 2022,
Sec. 13401), but many states also gave handouts to EV
buyers to the tune of almost $1,500 when averaged across
all EVs sold in 2021. There are also federal, state, and utility
subsidies for charging infrastructure, which add up to more
than $1,300 per EV.
Second are the indirect subsidies, most notably avoided
state and federal fuel taxes. Given that fuel taxes are used
to fund road construction and maintenance, and EVs are
heavier than comparable ICEVs and thus impart more
stress on roads, EV owners should be paying more than
ICEV owners in fuel taxes. But most states are only slowly
catching up to fixing the gap in tax treatment, and the
federal government is doing nothing at all. Another piece
of hidden subsidies are the extra costs imparted on the
electric grid by EVs, of which EV owners are only paying
a portion. Generation, transmission, distribution, and
overhead costs for utilities are all affected by EVs, and it is
crucial for the future of the electric grid that EVs charge at
times that reduce demand volatility rather than increase it
as is often the case today.
Finally, regulatory mandates, which are the three blue
columns on the right side of Figure 1, make up the largest
chunk of the hidden cost of EVs. The largest contribution
is due to the CAFE standards, which in recent years have
been made increasingly stringent in order to make ICEVs
more expensive and to drive EV adoption. On top of that,
the EPA has been empowered to enact GHG emissions
standards above and beyond the de facto reductions in
GHG emissions created by the CAFE standards. Many
states, most notably California, also have zero emissions
vehicle (ZEV) mandates that require automakers to sell a
certain number of EVs in those states and act as another
tax on ICEVs.
Combining all these hidden subsidies adds $48,698 to the
cost of an average MY2021 EV over 10 years, far exceed-
ing the $8,047 difference given by Burnham et al. (2021).
Assuming the EV is driven for 10 years and 120,000 miles—
an optimistic assumption given that that the average U.S. light-duty vehicle is driven 11,467 miles per year (EERE,
2020) and most EVs are used for short-distance trips and
commutes—these subsidies and the average of $4,569 in
extra costs incurred by EV owners for charging and electric-
ity losses are equivalent to the EV owner paying $53,267 over
the lifetime of the vehicle. EV advocates claim the cost of
electricity to charge an EV is $1.21/gallon equivalent (Edison
Electric Institute, 2021). However, the true cost of fueling a
MY2021 EV, including excess charging costs and subsidies,
is equal to $17.33 per gallon of gasoline. This analysis shows
that electricity is a long way from becoming a cost-effective
transportation fuel compared to gasoline.
Federal policy is also pushing EVs over hybrid vehicles,
even though hybrids offer a far more efficient way to
improve fuel economy and reduce emissions. They use a
much smaller battery, offer excellent driving range and
performance, and don’t require any upgrades to our electric
infrastructure. Toyota estimated that 90 hybrid batteries
can be made from the same amount of raw materials as one
EV battery and that those hybrids will reduce emissions 37
times more over their lifetime than one EV (McParland,
2023). However, hybrids receive far fewer subsidies and
regulatory favors than EVs, as the prevailing political con-
sensus is “all EV or nothing.”
The optimistic assumptions from Burnham et al. and other
researchers regarding maintenance costs, battery life, etc.
are worth noting but are beyond the scope of this study.
The focus here will be explaining the different elements
of Figure 1 and showing how EVs are not economical
for most drivers without state and federal subsidies and
regulatory mandates forcing them into the marketplace and
hiding the true costs of manufacturing and using them.
Section 1: Regulatory Credits
The largest source of financial support for EVs comes not
from direct subsidies but from hidden costs driven by
federal regulations. These regulatory standards are applied
on a fleetwide basis and allow for the trading of regula-
tory credits, the costs of which are passed on to buyers
of gasoline and diesel vehicles. What’s not hidden is the
desire of federal regulators to use these standards to force
Americans to buy EVs, and when the latest standards
were announced earlier this year the Biden administration
prominently noted that they are designed to make 67% of
new light-duty vehicles sold in the U.S. all-electric by 2032
(The White House, 2023).
Two sets of federal standards are being used to drive EV
adoption, and the CAFE standards are the most prominent. Congress established the CAFE standards in 1975 following
the Arab oil embargo and a (now debunked) concern that
the U.S. was reaching “peak oil,” that is, that it would no
longer be able to sufficiently increase oil production to meet
growing demand. The CAFE standards require that each auto
manufacturer meet a certain minimum average fuel economy
across their entire fleet of new vehicles sold in the U.S. (49
U.S.C. 32902). The National Highway Transportation Safety
Administration (NHTSA), housed inside the Department of
Transportation (DOT), is responsible for setting the stan-
dards, while the EPA is responsible for determining the fuel
economy of each year’s new vehicle models.
The dubious notion that the public good of reducing oil
demand justified a federally mandated minimum fuel econ-
omy for all U.S. passenger vehicles—thereby trumping other
consumer preferences for safety, vehicle size, performance,
and so on—underpinned the existence of the CAFE stan-
dards for over three decades. It also drove the expansion of
preferential treatment within federal regulations for alterna-
tive fuel vehicles, such as ethanol, natural gas, and hydrogen.
The second set of federal standards are the GHG emis-
sions standards established by the EPA. Just as concerns
about the U.S. running out of oil abated thanks to the shale
revolution that began in the mid-2000s, another dubious
public good was rising up to justify improving the fuel
economy of the U.S. vehicle fleet: reducing emissions of
GHGs from vehicles to appease those who believe it will
mitigate climate change. Transportation accounted for 28%
of total U.S. GHG emissions in 2021 (EPA, n.d.) and U.S.
emissions accounted for a 13% (and declining) share of
global emissions in 2020 (Crippa et al., 2021, p. 239), which
means U.S. transportation accounts for only a fraction of
the global total. Nevertheless, environmental groups have
made reducing GHG emissions from U.S. vehicles a prior-
ity policy plank for over three decades.
The U.S. Supreme Court granted environmental groups
their wish with the Massachusetts v. EPA decision (2007),
which held that the EPA had the authority under the Clean
Air Act to regulate GHG emissions from vehicles. However,
the technology does not yet exist to efficiently capture or
convert GHGs as they leave the tailpipe. Today, the primary
options for reducing GHG emissions from vehicles are to
improve engine fuel efficiency, use lower emitting fuels, or
convert to all-electric vehicles.
Since the addition of the EPA standards, the DOT and the
EPA have worked in tandem to produce coherent GHG and
CAFE standards. As described in the rest of this section, these standards, combined with additional state standards,
add an estimated $27,881, or $8.44 per gallon equivalent, to
the true cost of an EV, all of which is passed on to consum-
ers of ICEV vehicles. Companies are not required to report
the cost of the regulatory credits that EV manufacturers
sell to automakers that fall below the standards, and com-
panies may even trade or waive the credits for non-cash
compensation. The complexity and lack of transparency
of these regulatory regimes obscures the true costs of each
EV, reducing accountability to the public for the costs and
attendant negative consequences. Nevertheless, we’ll make
a conservative attempt to estimate the low-end value of the
credits on a per vehicle basis.
CAFE Standards
Elon Musk claims to oppose the federal tax credits for EVs
(Elliott, 2021), which have not benefited Tesla since the
company surpassed the limit on vehicle deliveries to be eli-
gible for the credits. However, Musk never criticizes federal regulatory credits, which added $1.78 billion to Tesla’s 2022
revenue and have been a major, if not primary, driver of the
company’s profitability (L, 2023). Understanding how these
credits work and how much they cost is critical to under-
standing how the CAFE standards are the largest tool the
federal government has for driving the adoption of EVs.
Under the current regulations, automakers that do not
meet CAFE standards are required to purchase credits from
automakers whose fleets exceed the standards. Because the
standards are rising so rapidly, far faster than the typical
improvement rate of ICEV engines, the market for these
credits amounts to billions of dollars every year. Because
the average fuel economy of an EV with a 300-mile range
in 2021 was appraised at about 113 miles per gallon of
gasoline-equivalent (MPGe)1, compared to a 36.32 MPGe
average for all new light-duty vehicles in 2021 (EIA, 2022),
these credits represent an enormous incentive for auto-
makers to build more EVs. Improving the fuel efficiency of
ICEVs or selling more hybrids does not give them as large
of a boost as selling more EVs. 
Section 2: Direct Subsidies
The CAFE and GHG mandates send a clear signal to
automakers: Sell a requisite number of EVs or go bankrupt.
Because EVs are still significantly more expensive to make
than comparable ICEVs, direct credits to consumers are
essential for automakers to price vehicles high enough to
cover their costs while still attracting consumers. Despite
the current incentives in place, the Ford Motor Company
is losing over $70,000 on each EV it currently sells (Bryce,
2023) and inventory is stacking up in dealer lots for
several brands as sales are not keeping pace with govern-
ment-mandated production (Muller, 2023). Therefore, it is likely that automakers will be requesting even more direct
subsidies in the coming years.
Direct subsidies are more visible to the average American
compared to the complexities of the CAFE standards and
ZEV mandates, but when it comes to EVs, the large and
varied regime of subsidies and rules at the federal and state
levels obscures the full costs to taxpayers and consumers.
Direct subsidies for EVs come in two forms: federal and
state tax rebates and the ability to avoid federal and state
gasoline taxes and fees. We’ll cover each of these items in
turn.
Federal Tax Rebate for EV Buyers
Federal tax credits for EVs were initiated by the Energy
Improvement and Extension Act (2008, Sec. 205), which
created a $7,500 credit for light-duty EVs but capped the
program at 250,000 vehicles and ended it in 2014. The
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (2009, Sec. 1141)
took out the sunset date but capped the credit at 200,000
vehicles per manufacturer.
The eligibility requirements underwent some minor
changes over the ensuing years, but the Inflation Reduction
Act (IRA; H.R. 5376, 2022) changed the game significantly.
While the new law maintains the Section 30D $7,500 credit
for new vehicles, the vehicles must undergo final assembly
in the U.S., the battery pack must have 50% of its compo-
nents manufactured or assembled in the U.S., which rises
10% each year until reaching 100% in 2029, and certain
critical minerals used in the vehicle must be extracted and
processed domestically or in a country that has a free-trade
agreement with the U.S. (Sec. 13401). Vehicles not meeting
these requirements will have their tax credit reduced.
The law takes out the 200,000-vehicle cap for automaker
eligibility, but it adds a consumer income cap of $150,000
for single filers and $300,000 for joint filers and a price cap
on the vehicles: $55,000 for cars and $80,000 for trucks
and SUVs. Used vehicles valued below $25,000 and more
than two years old are eligible for a $4,000 credit if the
buyer makes less than $75,000 for single filers and $150,000
for joint filers. The law also added a panoply of subsidies
for domestic EV battery manufacturing, most notably a
production tax credit for battery cells and modules that will
provide hundreds of millions annually to every Gigafactory
that is eligible (Sec. 13502).
In addition, the IRA includes a $7,500 tax credit for com-
mercial electric vehicles (Sec. 13403). The IRS, despite pub-
lic protestations from Sen. Manchin and other lawmaker involved in writing the bill, has generously interpreted this
credit to apply to any leased EV, effectively circumventing
the restrictions on the Section 30D credit and resulting in a
rapid increase in the number of leased relative to purchased
EVs (Voelcker, 2023). Because of these recent changes in
statute and IRS guidance, it is not yet known exactly how
much the typical EV will receive in credits going forward.
However, the way the law is currently being enforced,
buyers of the vast majority of EV models receive the full
value of the credit as long as they meet the income eligi-
bility requirements (EERE, n.d.-c). Many EV buyers will
not meet the income eligibility requirements, but since this
analysis covers the average EV, irrespective of the location
or situation of the buyer, we assume the EV receives the full
$7,500 credit.
State Tax Rebates for EV Buyers
There are numerous credits available to EV buyers (EERE,
n.d.-a), and while not every state offers direct incentives
or rebates, utilities and municipalities in every state also
offer direct and indirect incentives. Given the number and
complexity of local laws and utility credits, this analysis
only considers state incentives, and 2021 is the most recent
year of complete data. Several states have rebate programs
that are not as simple as a flat credit regardless of the buyer’s
income level, cost of the vehicle, etc. Also, some states had
programs that did not run for the entire 2021 calendar year,
so the rebates must be reduced in proportion to the per-
centage of time the program was not in effect.
As of the time of publication, we have not completed a full
analysis of state incentives, and we will provide that anal-
ysis in a later supplement to this paper. Our preliminary
analysis indicates that states handed out over $646 mil-
lion in taxpayer subsidies to EV buyers in 2021. Dividing
by the 435,320 EVs sold in 2021, the average EV buyer
received state credits totaling $1,484. In total, the average
EV receives $8,984 in state and federal credits, or $2.72 per
gallon equivalent of gasoline.
Avoided Federal and State Gasoline Taxes and Fees
Gasoline and diesel drivers pay significant liquid fuel taxes
to fund the building and maintenance of federal and state
roads, bridges, and even bicycle lanes. Federal gasoline
taxes are $0.184/gallon and federal diesel taxes are $0.244/
gallon (EIA, 2023). The American Petroleum Institute
(2022) estimates the average state taxes/fees on gasoline are
$0.3869/gallon and $0.4024/gallon for diesel. Therefore,
combined federal/state taxes and fees on gasoline average
$0.5709/gallon and on diesel average $0.6464/gallon. Section 3: Indirect Subsidies and
Socialized Infrastructure Costs
It is hard to conceptualize the amount of infrastructure
needed to deliver gasoline to your vehicle and electricity to
your home. Starting with extracting oil from the ground,
transporting it, refining it, transporting it to a gas station,
and finally building and maintaining the gas station, a tre-
mendous amount of work is included in the price of the gas
you buy at the pump. Similarly, bringing electricity to an EV
charging port involves extracting the base fuel, converting it
to electricity at a power plant, and transporting that electric-
ity long distances to the charger. Figure 3 is an attempt to
put all that infrastructure onto a single diagram, although it
far understates the complexities of these operations.
While some of the infrastructure used to create gasoline
is used to create other products, whose margins support
the maintenance of the shared infrastructure, by and large,
what you pay at the pump reflects the cost to deliver the
gas to the pump. This is not the case when you charge an
EV, which exerts an enormous electrical load on the grid
infrastructure it is utilizing. Despite the need for extra
infrastructure to serve this load, an EV owner usually pays
the same flat rate for electricity as a normal load.
A typical 80 kWh EV charging from 50% to 100% over 8
hours at your home consumes power at a rate of 5 kW, but
it could consume up to 10 kW at any given time, or about
8 times as much power as a U.S. home draws on average (EIA, n.d.-a).7 An EV charging that same amount in 20
minutes at a fast charging station pulls down 120 kW, about
as much electricity as an average grocery store consumes
(EIA, n.d.-b, Table C22).8 The cost to the utility to serve this
load—including replacement and upgrade of transformers,
circuits, feeders, and transmission lines, as well as extra
overhead costs like metering and billing required to service
the charging stations—is socialized across all the utility’s
ratepayers and not directly charged to the EV owners.
These socialized costs add up to $11,883 per EV over 10
years, and EV owners incur an additional $4,569 in costs
over 10 years to charge their vehicles—including residential
and private charging equipment, electricity losses behind
the meter, and billing/overhead—above and beyond the
cost of the electricity that goes into their vehicles. These
extra charging costs for EV owners equate to $1.38 per gal-
lon equivalent over the life of the EV, which alone exceeds
the $1.21 per gallon equivalent that EV advocates claim
that it costs to charge an EV.
Charging Infrastructure, Billing Fees, and Electricity
Losses
EV owners, utility ratepayers, and taxpayers accrue many
extra costs related to the charging and use of EVs that are
not accounted for in most total cost of ownership models.
The study by Burnham et al. (2021) does not consider the
cost of charging infrastructure in its base case nor any extra
fees on the electricity the EV owner purchases, and only in
its sensitivity analysis does it account for a cost of $800 to
purchase and install a residential EV charging unit (p. 62).
Burnham et al. and other studies of EV costs also do not
account for the cost of public charging stations. The capital
costs for the vast majority of public charging stations are
subsidized by taxpayers, utilities, or the entities hosting the
stations and are not accrued to EV owners.
A group from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory
recently projected that by 2025 the U.S. will need 1,000,000
public Level 2 charging stations and 182,000 public Level
3 (fast charging) stations to serve an EV fleet of 33 million
vehicles (Wood et al., 2023, p. vi). That is on top of 26.8
million private charging ports. The total cost of the public
infrastructure ranges from $32–$55 billion (p. vii). 
Incremental Power Capacity, Transmission and
Distribution Infrastructure Costs
Returning to the discussion at the beginning of this sec-
tion about the demand on the electric grid created by EV
charging, particularly fast charging, there is a cost to the
extra transmission and distribution infrastructure needed
to serve those large loads. Utilities have historically assessed
what is known as a “demand charge” on commercial and
industrial consumers based on their usage during peak
hours. That charge accounts for the extra infrastructure
costs required to serve those customers. Currently, most
utilities are socializing that cost for EV owners by not
assessing demand charges on residential EV chargers, even
though those chargers can use as much power at certain
times as several homes.
We can use a hypothetical demand charge for a residential
EV charging station to place an upper bound on the cost
to the utility of charging that EV. Demand charges average
about $15/kW (McLaren et al., 2022, “Demand charge
rate data.xlsm”) and are based on the maximum amount
of demand (measured in kilowatt or kW of power) that a
customer used in any interval (typically 15 minutes) during
the billing cycle. A common residential charging unit on a
dedicated 40-ampere circuit at 240 volts draws 9.6 kW
(40 A * 240 V = 9.6 kW). A $15/kW monthly demand
charge on this unit equates to $1,728 per year and $17,280
over 10 years. As noted earlier, public fast charging sta-
tions use more than 10 times that amount of power, but we
assume those costs are recouped in the rates those stations
charge their users.
In 2019, Boston Consulting Group estimated the costs of
infrastructure upgrades to serve EVs at $1,700–$5,800 per
EV (Baker et al., 2019). If we take the midpoint of that range,
which is $3,750 as a lower bound to our estimate, then
we can place these additional infrastructure costs for EVs
somewhere between $3,750 and $17,280 over 15 years. That
is a wide range but likely accurately reflects the wide range
of costs to utilities depending on their infrastructure and the
location of EVs in their service areas. The midpoint of this
range, which we consider to be an appropriate estimate for an
average EV, is $10,515, or $3.18 per gallon equivalent.
It is important to note that there can be many cross-
subsidies and variable impacts on the electric grid depending on where and when charging occurs. Fast-
charging installations for large vehicles and public transit
can exceed 300 kW, and adding a residential EV charger
in a dense urban area near public charging stations and
other large loads may not add as much infrastructure costs
as adding one in a rural area. Charging an EV when an
owner gets home during the 5–9 p.m. peak demand hours
adds to grid volatility and resource adequacy problems,
but charging late at night or into the morning may reduce
overall system volatility and strain. Many utilities across the
country, particularly in California, are beginning to charge
variable rates to EV owners based on time of use. For
example, San Diego Gas & Electric rates for EV households
range from $0.14/kWh to $0.81/kWh, in addition to a $16
monthly fee (San Diego Gas & Electric, n.d.). Therefore,
EV owners may incur much higher costs than noted here,
particularly if they charge at times when rates are higher.
Figuring out how and when EVs should charge is a critical
problem for policymakers and utilities to solve if the federal
government is going to continue to mandate EV adoption.
Conclusion
The stark reality for proponents of EVs and for the dream-
ers in the federal government, who are using fuel economy
regulations to force manufacturers to produce ever more
EVs, is that the true cost of an EV is in no way close to a
comparable ICEV. Our conservative estimate is that the
average EV accrues $48,698 in subsidies and $4,569 in
extra charging and electricity costs over a 10-year period,
for a total cost of $53,267, or $16.12 per equivalent gallon
of gasoline9. Without increased and sustained government
favors, EVs will remain more expensive than ICEVs for
many years to come. Hence why, even with these subsidies,
EVs have been challenging for dealers to sell and why basic
economic realities indicate that the Biden administration’s
dream of achieving 100% EVs by 2040 will never become a
reality.
EV apologists continue to claim that technology break-
throughs and economies of scale will rapidly bring down
these costs, but there is no Moore’s law for batteries, which
are a fundamentally different technology than semicon-
ductors. The benefits of economies of scale have largely
been reached by most lithium-ion battery manufacturers,
costs for those batteries have largely ended their downward
trend of the past decade (IEA, 2023a), and additional cost
improvements will be hard won. Lithium prices are nearly
quadruple what they were in 2019 (Trading Economics,
n.d.), and fluctuations in raw materials costs will play a
significant role in the cost of EV batteries going forward.
The lesson to be learned from this study is that markets,
not government, drive innovation and efficiency. Despite
the massive financial and regulatory advantages being
offered to EVs, there are more than four times more
hybrid and plug-in hybrid vehicles than full EVs regis-
tered in the U.S. (EERE, n.d.-b). Toyota estimated that the
amount of materials to make one EV battery can be used
to make 90 hybrid batteries and that those 90 hybrids will
result in 37 times more emissions reductions over their
lifetime than one EV (McParland, 2023). Perhaps if D.C.
politicians and bureaucrats stop trying to force Americans
to build and buy their preferred types of vehicles, the
cleaner and brighter future that they imagine will actually
materialize.